>> Hello and welcome to the Haskell
Weekly podcast. I'm your host, Taylor Fausak.
I'm the lead engineer at ITProTV. With
me today is one of the engineers on my team, Cameron Gera.
Thanks for joining me today, Cam.
>> Hey, Taylor. Glad to be here. Excited. It
is a new month. It is November, which is
going to be a great month. It's also my birthday month, so
I'm a little biased towards that. But October was
Hacktoberfest. That's behind us. We're moving on.
Thanks for all of you guys who participated. You know, it's
good to get that open source community some
love. And I am just glad that we all got
to participate. But this month is
even more exciting. We have the State of
Haskell survey that is out. It is
live. It lives in this week's edition of
Haskell Weekly and also in our show notes. But
it's gonna give you a chance to show your voice and
share how you interact with Haskell and the
things you like. The things you could think need some more
love. We're really glad that we can offer
this to you. You know, it's a Haskell Weekly exclusive
thing. So we do this, we
collect this data, and we share it with the community. So we've done this
for four years. And we're just
glad to be kicking it off this month. So thank you,
Taylor, for kind of heading that up.
>> Yeah, I'm happy to do it. And this, like you
mentioned, is the fourth year. So if you're interested
in what it looked like previous years, you can go back and
take a look at those results.
>> You mean we could go back in time?
>> We can. We have that power through the power
of HTML and old pages.
>> Nice.
>> But today we're not only talking about the Haskell
survey, we're also talking about this blog post by
Michael Snoyman called Haskell the bad
parts part one, implying somehow there's
more than one bad part of Haskell.
>> It could be, you know, everybody uses Haskell
little differently. So I think this was a great
post. I really appreciate his kind of banter,
in it as well. He was pretty lighthearted,
but also really giving you the chance
to know some things you may not have known before because I
know I've learned some things reading this blog post.
>> It's nice to see a critical post that's not written in a really
critical tone. You can tell that Michael cares about
Haskell and Haskell community and the language, and
he wants it to be better. So he's writing
this post to point out some of the things that he's
spotted that maybe could be better. So
what's the first thing that he noticed?
>> Yeah. So he first starts
off with talking about the foldl
function, which is
lazy, but that doesn't
quite, make it useful,
right? It doesn't really give us what we want.
Um, you know, we tend
to run away from foldl
because we have other alternatives that
really actually work well for us that don't cause
memory leaks like a foldr, a foldl',
which are strict. Well, foldl' is strict,
foldr is still lazy, but you know, when you're
folding left, lazy doesn't quite make
sense.
>> Yeah, it's funny because foldl is kind of like
too lazy because foldr is
lazy in the spine in the list that
it's folding over and foldl' is
strict in the combining function,
so foldl no prime is just,
like, too lazy. Never, never gets anything
done.
>> I mean, I wish I could be that lazy and
still get used, right? Um yeah,
but if you wanted to actually have a
lazy foldl,
Snoyman jokingly says you should name it
foldlButLazyIReallyMeanIt.
Or else I think he'll probably,
tell you about yourself a little bit if you create a
PR against a code base, he
maintains, which I appreciate
his brutal honesty there. I think it's he's
a lover of Haskell. So he's very
passionate about good code. And I'm
thankful that we have people like him in our community.
>> Yeah. Same. And in the Haskell
community, we often use the prime to indicate
that this is a strict version of a function. But
there's no similar thing for saying this is a
lazy version of a function. And I like that suffix
butLazyIReallyMeanIt. That could stand in
for prime. It's a little bit wordier, but I think it does the
same job,
>> Right, well, I know. Don't we use
tilde to enforce laziness
for we're enabling the strict
data language extension could we use
tilde in function names?
>> I wish you could. In the same way that you can
use. Like you mentioned tilde for fields to mark
them as lazy or even on pattern matches. To mark them is
lazy. And on the other side, you can use
exclamation points to mark things as strict.
But you can't use those in function names, unfortunately.
I would love it if you could say
foldl~ or
foldl! It would look a little
more like Ruby or Clojure or something like that. But I
think that would be nice. And we wouldn't have to repurpose
prime for all these different things.
>> Could that be, in part two of this, uh,
podcast and blog post?
>> It might be, I think, that if Haskell allowed you
to do that, some people might think it was a bad
part. But who knows?
>> Nice. Well, you know, everyone's got an
opinion that's totally valid. I'm not gonna ever discredit
someone's opinion. Most people are smarter than me, so I'm
okay with that.
>> Speaking of folding or reducing
functions that are lazier than they should be the
next bad part that Snoyman points out
is sum or product.
They do different things, but they kind of work in the
same way. And what is it that he says
about those?
>> Yeah, so you know, he
kind of talks about how the combining function determines the
strictness of the sum and product
reducing functions, which is
a little odd. You wouldn't expect a function you
pass in to determine the strictness.
And, you know, only really
works for, you know, hypothetically
lazy numeric types so you could create your
own, sum and you know,
product functions that are quote unquote lazy.
But that doesn't necessarily make a ton of
sense, like you can't add
a number if there's not another number to add it to. Right?
>> Right. But this is a little tricky because a
lot of times when people talk about this,
they're talking like you mentioned about
some hypothetical lazy numeric
type that may or may not actually exist and may or
may not actually be used. So one that pops
up a lot is the Peano numbers, where you
have zero and then successor, and from those you
build up everything else. So one is
successor zero. Two is
successor, successor zero.
And this is where you could actually benefit from
laziness because you could have some logic that wants
to take the sum of some potentially
infinite list of Peano numbers. But
once that sum goes above, let's say
100 then you stop doing any work,
and if your number is lazy, you could do that
without consuming the entire list. But if
you're using a much more typical numeric type
like int or integer, then you're going to
have to consume the entire list to produce the
sum of that list. Which makes sense.
>> Yeah, definitely makes sense. Um, yeah. He
also kind of talks about how you can't really rely on
G.H.C.'s optimizer to
know what to make strict verse, what not to make
strict. And, you know, it makes
more sense to say, Hey, I want this
function to be strict and write it as
such, rather than relying on the compiler
to optimize it to be strict.
>> Right. It's not useful to tell the compiler you're using a
lazy function and then expect it to notice that it could
be strict or ultimately it is strict. And then
optimize it away for you. Just write the strict version in
the first place. But the good news here is that there
is an open merge request against
G.H.C. to fix this problem with sum and
product to make them strict. And this came out of
a discussion on one of the mailing lists.
Probably Haskell Cafe, but I don't remember right
now, and it was actually a pretty quick turnaround.
I think it's been like less than a month since someone
said, Hey, this doesn't look quite right. Let's get it
fixed. And then they opened a merge quest
and so yeah, already, one of the four
bad parts of Haskell has already been fixed.
>> Woohoo! Now we just got to cut a new
version. We're good to go.
>> Yeah. So what's the next bad part?
>> Yeah, so the next one he talks about is data
text IO. So we talk a
lot about: Do we use string? Do we use
text? And the community tends to
move away from string in favor of text.
But the data text IO gives us a
false sense of security when
dealing with in particular read file.
That doesn't ensure
specific locale encoding.
So I feel like this is a problem in
Haskell and a lot of language is that,
you know, you try to read a file and it's in a
format or locale you haven't
programmed for, you know you're gonna create an exception
that doesn't, I mean, honestly, catches you
off guard.
>> We've run into this one quite a bit at work
because we run a lot of our stuff in Docker
containers and those containers are pretty minimal.
So at first we weren't setting the LANG
or LC_ALL. There's a couple environment
variables you can set to control which locality you're in by
default. And we weren't setting those.
So when we ran some report that produced A
CSV that happened to contain a non ASCII character in
it, it would try to print it out, and then it would crash
because it says, Hey, I tried to print something to the screen, but the
encoding I was using didn't match up with what you
wanted. That was really
surprising and difficult to work around. And I
remember I wasn't the one that ran into it,
but somebody asked me for help. And I was like, Oh, yeah,
I've seen this exact problem before where
it just says, like, invalid character or whatever the error
is, and I happened to know what the solution
is. But if I didn't already have that
experience, I would have been completely lost.
So this can be completely mystifying.
>> Yeah, and I love how he uses the
metaphor of wolf in sheep's clothing,
right? Like you think it's gonna be nice. It's going to do
what you need it to do. But then it
bites you in the butt, and you're like, Holy cow, What just
happened? And like, I mean, I
probably was that person because I do remember a familiar
situation and that dealing with this script that
we were running and getting a file format
from, you know, some company and
they have special characters and we didn't encode
correctly the locale, and we're kicking ourselves.
So, um.
>> Yep, and we've got to fix these days, so we're good now.
But it was confusing at the time, and another place that
I've run into this before is when switching between Linux
and Windows in most desktop Linux
environments, the default locale is
UTF-8, but on Windows, that's not the case.
So I'll take software that works perfectly fine on
my Linux desktop and on my Mac
laptop. But as soon as I try to run it on my Windows
machine, everything stops working. And it's like,
Oh, right. I either have to change my code page on
Windows or explicitly set the encoding
or just stop using data dot text dot
IO, which is often the easiest answer.
And in fact, the Rio Library that
Snoyman works on has a function that does this for
you called readFileUtf8.
And it sets the encoding for you to
UTF-8 and then reads the file
>> Right, So you tend to not need
to worry at that point, right? Because you know
what the encoding is gonna be because this functions well
named as well, right? It's saying, Hey, you're gonna read a
UTF-8 file. But it also does what it says it's
supposed to do where we get this false and
security with data text IO.
>> Snoyman really has a knack for naming. He's
got foldlButLazyIReallyMeanIt and
readFileUtf8. Another thing here
is that when you're reading a file, often the file
type has an encoding already specified.
So, like with JSON or XML, you
know, up front that those they're going to be UTF-8
So if your system locale is set to
UTF-16 and you want to try to read a
JSON file, you probably don't want to read
that file using the UTF-16
system locale. And that's where the problem comes in.
>> Gotcha. Well, thanks for diving into
that one. What's the next one that he talks about?
>> So the next one and the last one, at least
for part one of the bad parts, is the
bracket function from control dot exception.
And this is a tricky one, for sure.
>> Yeah, I think the fact that dealing with
async conceptions is tricky to deal with. I
know in our code base we've had some
odd async exception handling that has
kind of baffled us. With time and
effort, we get to where we need to be, but in the
moment it's a lot.
>> This is tricky to talk about, even because
async exceptions when you hear that you may think like
Oh, that's an exception that was thrown on an
async thread, uh, something
that was either spawned with forkIO
or with the async package.
But that's not quite what it means. And
there's a good chance that I will say something wrong in this part
because I'm not well versed in exception handling in Haskell
myself, Snoyman has spent a ton of
time on this. And whenever I run into an exception
problem, if there's a blog post by Snoyman about
that particular problem I'm encountering, I feel
really grateful and happy because I know I can
just use that as a solution.
But the way I understand it is
that async exceptions are exceptions that are
thrown from another thread into your
thread, and they can happen during pure code.
But I guess that's kind of besides the point here. I just
wanted to mention that async exceptions as a
term can be a little confusing,
>> Right, I think I was probably using it incorrectly, so I
appreciate you sharing that.
>> But the part about bracket that he thinks is a
bad part or a wart in Haskell is that,
I guess if people are unfamiliar
with bracket. It's a function where you can acquire
some resource and then perform some action on
that resource and clean up the resource after
you're done with it. So the most common example of
this is opening a file, writing something to it
and then closing the file. The purpose
of bracket is to make sure that opening and
closing always happen, regardless
of if an exception is thrown while you're dealing with the
resource while you're writing to or reading from that
file or whatever it is you're doing. And this is
really nice, because the naive code you would
write to do this, where if you're in a do block and you say,
open the file, grab that handle write to the
file and then close it, that reads really
nicely top to bottom. But if I was going through that
in code review, I would say, Well, what happens
if an exception is thrown while we're
writing to the file, then this file handle is still
open and it never gets closed. That's the
problem that bracket is meant to solve.
>> So what's wrong with bracket? Why not use
bracket?
>> The problem with bracket is that the cleanup action.
So like closing a file uses a
thing called an interruptible mask,
and this is where we kind of get out of my
area of comfort or my wheelhouse.
But if I understand the situation
correctly during your clean up, if
an async exception is thrown, your
cleanup will be interrupted or canceled,
and then that exception will be
thrown somewhere else. Probably maybe the main thread.
But what this means is that you can't rely
on your clean up running because it might be interrupted.
So if I've got that interpretation correct,
the fix is to use a different thing called an
uninterruptible mask. And an
uninterruptible mask means that other
async exceptions can't prevent that
chunk of code from running. Or rather, they
can't like cut into that piece of code running
so you can count on your cleanup always
running.
>> Yeah, and I think Snoyman does a great job
here in the blog post, kind of
explaining mask, explaining the
mystery around it because,
honestly, I don't think a lot of people have dealt with it.
>> I'm one of those people. I haven't dealt with it.
>> Right and you're in my mind, one
of the most experienced Haskellers I know. So
to say that you don't know it is probably, you
know, a lot of people who deal with Haskell probably never
experienced what that is or how
it would create a problem. So, grateful that
he has been in those
places and he knows the solution and he's
willing to share that. So, uh, he does a
great job of being sarcastic and like, Yeah, you
expect this to do this right? And
no, you don't.
>> The good news is that even if you don't understand
masks or haven't even heard of them before, it doesn't really
matter. You can reach for a library that solves this
problem for you. This isn't something that's a
problem when the language necessarily
it's a problem with what the bracket function in the
standard library does. And once again,
Snoyman has this library called unliftio which is
ultimately used in Rio. So they all kind of fit
together, but the unliftio library and
its bracket function use an
uninterruptible mask so it doesn't have
this particular problem.
>> So you're telling me, is all these
warts that Snoyman has talked about, you know, as
quote unquote bad parts of Haskell. He
pretty much has a solution for.
>> Yeah. Yeah, It's, uh I don't know if he's trying to
sell us something, you know he wants He wants
us to get on board with the Rio bandwagon.
Um, but, yeah, sum and product. You
know, there's a solution in the works
data text IO, you can use the Rio
Library. It saves you from that, um,
bracket unliftio will save
you from. It's really just foldl. And you know,
there are solutions to that, too. But the problem with Foldl is
mostly that it's there at all, and it's in the prelude.
>> Right? Well, we appreciate him talking about
this, and if anybody has any more
questions or warts that they've run into, I
know Snoyman's looking for that so tweet him
or, um, I don't know, maybe make
a PR against his repo or something along those lines to
let him know some warts. And I'm sure he would love to
do part two of the Haskell the bad
parts.
>> Yeah. I wonder how many parts they're gonna be.
>> Well, hopefully not too many. Because I know in my mind I
don't have a long list of warts with Haskell. I
love what it gives us what allows us to do and
what, How fast we can iterate. I'm
really thankful for that.
>> Yeah, me too.
>> All right, well, I think that's it.
>> Yeah, that'll do it for us today. Thank
you for listening to the Haskell weekly podcast. I've been
your host, Taylor Fausak. And with me today was
Cameron Gera. If you'd like to learn more about
Haskell Weekly, you can check out our website Haskell
weekly dot News. Or you can find us on social
media. Our twitter handle is Haskell Weekly
our Reddit user name is Haskell Weekly our
GitHub user name is Haskell Weekly,
and we're probably Haskell weekly everywhere
else.
>> Yeah, and I know if you have a blog post that
you maybe want featured in Haskell Weekly. Um, don't forget
to submit a PR on the high school
weekly. Um, GitHub page.
So, uh, and the Haskell weekly
podcast is brought to you by
ITProTV the e-learning platform for
IT professionals And we would love to extend
a coupon code to you of Haskell Weekly
30. To get 30% off the
lifetime of your subscription, feel free to
go Take look, sign up for a free membership.
If you're curious of what we do on, Do you
know if you love it so much? Sign up with that Haskell Weekly
30 podcast promo code, and you will
be saving 30% off for the lifetime
of your subscription. So I think
that about does it. Thanks for joining us today.
We'll see you next time.
>> Bye.